---
title: Phantom Types
tags: #fp
---

Phantom types are types that have parameterized type variables that do not appear on the right side of its definition. For example:

``` haskell
data Danny a = String
```

`Danny` is a phantom type because `a` does not appear on the right side of `=`. `a` exists only to provide extra information about a type at compile time. We can define abstract data types [[2da15626-25db-4ea5-b296-86aa566b6d6f]] with zero data constructors to represent this extra information.

``` haskell
data NormalForm
data GhostForm
```

This extra information can be used to restrict function arguments.

``` haskell
goingGhost :: Danny NormalForm -> Danny GhostForm
fly :: Danny GhostForm -> IO ()
```

Normally, data constructors for phantom types are not exported in order to enforce guarantees about values in programs. It is common for only smart constructors to be exported into the public API.

``` haskell
createDanny :: String -> Danny NormalForm
```

> This prevents people from using the actual constructors directly forcing them to use the smart constructors. Note that it also means that people won't be able to pattern match. Hence, you'll need to provide some way to allow them to deconstruct the data as well. — [Stack Overflow User](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/28247543/motivation-behind-phantom-types/28250226#comment44856665_28247968)

## Motivation

[From Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/28247543/motivation-behind-phantom-types/28250226#28250226):

- useful for making invalid states unrepresentable

- carry some information on the type level

## Examples

- [wxHaskell](https://wiki.haskell.org/wikiupload/6/65/Wxhaskell.pdf) uses phantom types to encode object-oriented class inheritance hierarchies in their foreign function interface. This [PureScript FFI wrapper](https://blog.ndk.io/purescript-ffi.html) also uses this technique.
